Okay.
Before we get started with the data and time classes, let's briefly discuss some very fundamental concepts
related to dates and times.
And without knowing this, you must still be able to perform any programming tasks that are relevant
to dates and times.
But when you review the API specs, you may have trouble understanding some of the terminology.
So it's important to know the background information that we are going to cover in this particular lecture.
Now as humans, we are trying to think of date and time in terms of months, days, years, hours and
so on, right?
However, for computers, this kind of interpretation is not easy to represent.
So the model time as a single large number representing a point on a continuous timeline.
And an origin called Epic has been arbitrarily set at midnight of January 1st, 1970.
And here we can see the timeline on Epic.
And this is the same convention that is used in UNIX and it is in fact referred to as UNIX time.
Not that epic generally means start off something.
So in the case of computers, APL is considered as a starting point and time is measured relative to
epic.
So time is measured forward and also backward as we would also have events happening before 1970.
So if you consider this very instance of time, which is around 12:30 a.m., July the second, 2017,
then it would be a single large number on the timeline, like the number of seconds or milliseconds
elapsed since the APIC time, which is considered as zero because APIC is the origin and the date has
86400 seconds, which is nothing but 24 hours multiplied by 60 minutes, which is multiplied by 60 seconds.
Right.
So based on that, computers can deduce date and time that we humans can comprehend.
And later we will look at classes that can capture timestamps on a timeline.
Now here we see this term called as UTC and let's see what it means.
UTC is short for coordinated universal time, and it's the international time standard that the civil
world uses for timekeeping.
So that's what our clocks follow.
Computer servers, aviation and even International Space Station rely on the standard.
On a typical day has 86400 seconds.
Right, because a day has 86400 seconds.
However, occasionally, once every year or two, there can be a day when it can have 1/2 more or 1/2
less.
And that is to account for the uneven rotation of Earth.
Now we know that Earth's rotation is the reason why we have 24 hours in a day.
But it seems Earth also wobbles and sometimes also slows down.
And due to this, it may not be exactly 86400 seconds.
So we need to take this into account by adding a second.
And this second is referred to as a leap second.
Just like the way we have a leap year, once every four years as of January 2017, it seems that there
has been 27 leap seconds since 1972.
Now, sometimes Earth can also move faster.
And due to that, we may have 1/2 less.
But this did not happen so far.
So it was always only 1/2 more.
And UTC.
Time is measured via atomic clocks which are highly precise and there are over 70 UTC timing centers
around the world and an organization called BE IPM, which stands for International Bureau of Weights
and Measures, uses the times that are reported by these different timing centers to compute the exact
UTC time and it uses some sort of weighted averages.
However, computers have their own internal clocks to compute UTC time and they are good at reflecting
UTC time, but they may not reflect the leap seconds.
But practically, this is not considered as a big issue.
From what I read, JPM implementations also do not handle leap seconds so they are just not considered
as a serious problem.
And this is just for your information.
U t which is short for universal time, is another standard, and it is based on astronomical observations
and not on atomic clocks.
And it is there since 1884 and one of its versions called UTI one accounts for leap seconds.
Now at that time, GMT, which stands for Greenwich Mean Time, was chosen as the World's Standard Time.
What that means is that there is this notion of time zones across the world, and these time zones vary
in few hours from GMT, which is by itself a time zone.
Green, which is actually a place in London and also has an observatory called the Royal Observatory,
which is where this GMT is measured many times.
GMT is also alternatively referred to as UTC, which we just discussed.
Later during our demos, we will look at classes that handle different time zones.
Let me now show you an image that shows the different time zones and we can get more information from
it.
Okay.
So this image shows the different time zones.
Let me zoom in here.
Okay.
Now, here we have United Kingdom.
So that's at zero degrees longitude here, zero.
So that is the green.
Which time?
Greenwich Mean Time or UTC.
Here it is.
And towards the left we have the different time zones, a few time zones, and also.
Right, we have few time zones.
So let me scroll here.
So with within each time zone, all the different places within that time zone have the same time.
Generally, under some parts, follow something called as a daylight saving time.
Let me get back to that.
So with each region here, so there is an offset of plus one, which is nothing but plus one hour.
So if we are moving eastwards towards in this direction eastwards, then we are going to add plus one
hour with each time zone.
So this is one time zone.
This is another time zone.
And within this time zone, there is there is an offset of plus three.
So if there is an instance of time here, then at the same time in this particular time zone, it would
be ahead by 3 hours.
Now.
Here, for example, in India, India is five and a half hours ahead of GMT, so it's about five and
half hours ahead of GMT.
So similarly, you can look at all other countries here.
Now, if we move westwards towards the United States.
So United States is a really huge country.
So there are different time zones within the United States.
So this is the Pacific Time Zone here, the Los Angeles area, and we have the Eastern Time, the Central
Time.
So each of them, they are varying from the GMT.
For example, Pacific Time is around minus 8 hours behind false behind the GMT time.
So we have these different time zones.
And in some countries we have something called as the Daylight Saving Time.
So that is for saving the daylight.
And for instance, in the United States in the summer, the clock is moved by one hour ahead.
So so that's the daylight saving time.
And in fall, they actually move the clock backwards.
So when we are manipulating dates and times and you are going to deal with different time zones, then
you need to be aware of this, of the Daylight Saving Time.
And in short, it is called us DST.
And later in a demo we will also look at that even within the GMT, even within GMT here in green,
which does not follow Daylight Saving Time, but London follows Daylight Saving Time.
So so there is a time difference in for certain months, even within the same time zone.
So that's about the time zone.
And this link will also be available in the resources section.
And let's head back to our slides.
So we looked at the notion of timeline, the UTC timing, standard and time zone and we said that the
current instance of time can be represented in UTC on a timeline.
Such a timestamp is useful when we want to capture an event like user registration in a website and
this is handled by a certain class in Java.
But often we also need to keep track of certain things like birthdays, where a user specifies a specific
day, month and year that represents his or her birthday and to represent such individual entities.
A different class is used in Java, but when we are talking in terms of only dates rather than time,
then we are thinking in terms of a calendar.
Right?
And just like UTC, there are also standards that computers follow for calendars, but human beings
have come up with three kinds of calendar systems and they are solar, lunar and lunisolar.
And all these calendar systems are based on astronomical cycles.
The Gregorian calendar, which is the most widely used calendar across the world, is an example of
a solar calendar.
And it was introduced on October 15th of 1582.
And before that there was the Julian calendar that was introduced by Julius Caesar.
And the main difference between these two calendars is the rule that determines leap year.
And Gregorian.
Leap year is exactly divisible by four, but it is not divisible by 100 with the exception of 400.
So that's a leap year in Gregorian and in Julian.
A leap year is always exactly divisible by four.
So that seems to be the main difference between these two calendars.
And both these calendars have the same number of months in a year, and they also have the same number
of days in months also.
The Islamic calendar is an example of a lunar calendar.
And finally, Buddhist, Chinese, Hindu, Lunisolar and Hebrew are examples of Lunisolar calendars.
Now, if you're interested in learning more about these calendars, then you can just Google for them
and read more about them.
So since October 15, 1582, Gregorian calendar is what is being widely used throughout the world.
So how are events tracked before this date?
And for that Gregorian calendar, with its leap year, rules can be used once again on the Gregorian
calendar applied to dates before October 15, 1582 is referred to as pluralistic Gregorian calendar.
Now Java eight Data API uses a standard called ISO 8601, which is an international standard, and it
is based on the Gregorian calendar.
It basically means that Gregorian rules for Leap years are applied for all times, and ISO 8601 was
created by ISO, which stands for International Standards Organization, and it is based in Geneva.
So you might even know that.
And this ISO 601 standard aims to avoid the risk of misinterpreting dates and times when they are passed
between systems that are across national boundaries.
So it is like the Unicode character set.
So that's about the background we need.
So to summarize, we discuss the timeline and epic, which starts on Jan first, 1970, and every instance
of time is relative to Epic.
Then we discussed about UTC, which is the international time standard.
Finally, we briefly discuss the calendar systems and we say that the new Java API uses ISO 8601, which
is also an international standard that formalizes the Gregorian calendar.
So that's about it.
Thank you.
And see you in the next lecture.